Wasm plugin system (#1555)
typst/typst: docs/guides/guide-for-writing-plugins.md

---
description: |
  You need to use external code for performance 

>   reason or to avoid re inventing the wheel? This guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  reason or to avoid reinventing the wheel? This guide
```

  explains how to integrate your code as a plugin.
---

# Guide for plugin development

> This page helps you get started building plugins for typst.

Reviewer: I think it needs to be made more explicit that this guide is for more "advanced" users (regular users probably won't know what WebAssembly is and stuff, and will arrive at this page very confused). Maybe some "(Advanced)" sign could be added next to the title, along with a more explicit disclaimer at the beginning like "This guide is intended for developers who wish to create advanced plugins for Typst using the WebAssembly platform." Not sure of the best wording or text structure here, though.

Author: feel free to tell me what you think of the new wording!

> Typst is capable of interfacing with plugins compiled to WebAssembly via it's `plugin` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typst is capable of interfacing with plugins compiled to WebAssembly via its `plugin` function.
```

> Once your program has been compiled to WebAssembly, it also need to respect [the protocol](#protocol). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once your program has been compiled to WebAssembly, it also needs to respect [the protocol](#protocol). 
```

> Typst will run this code in isolation from your system which means printing and reading file will not be supported for security reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typst will run this code in isolation from your system, which means printing and reading files will not be supported for security reasons.
```

> Many compilers will use the [wasi ABI](https://wasi.dev/) by default or as their only option (e.g. emscripten), which allows printing, reading file etc. This will not work with typst, you will need to either compile to a different target if possible or stub your library using a tool (see below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many compilers will use the [wasi ABI](https://wasi.dev/) by default or as their only option (e.g. emscripten), which allows printing, reading files etc. This will not work with Typst, and you will need to either compile to a different target if possible or stub your library using a tool (see below).
```

> Typst will be able to run your code compiled targeting wasi if all the functions is the wasi protocol are stubbed (replaced by dummy implementions). Which you can easily achieve with [this tool](https://github.com/astrale-sharp/wasm-minimal-protocol/blob/master/wasi-stub/README.md#wasi-stub) that you can find on the repository below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typst will be able to run your code compiled targeting wasi if all the functions in the wasi protocol are stubbed (replaced by dummy implementations). You can easily achieve that with [this tool](https://github.com/astrale-sharp/wasm-minimal-protocol/blob/master/wasi-stub/README.md#wasi-stub) that you can find on the repository below.
```

You should check out this [link](https://github.com/astrale-sharp/wasm-minimal-protocol). The repo contains:

> - A list of examples of plugins implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A list of examples of plugin implementations.
```

> - A test runner for these examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A test runner for these examples.
```

- Wrappers to help you write your plugin in Rust. (Zig wrappers in development)

> - A stubber for wasi ()

Reviewer: I think you forgot to fill the parentheses here

Author: thanks!

# Protocol

> This section describes the protocol typst expects plugins to implement. This protocol sends and receive byte slices with typst as the host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes the protocol Typst expects plugins to implement. This protocol sends and receive byte slices with Typst as the host.
```

Types and functions are described using WAT syntax.

## Compilation

This protocol is only meant to be used by plugins compiled to 32-bits WebAssembly.

A plugin should compile to a shared WebAssembly library.

## Imports

Valid plugins need to import two functions (that will be provided by the runtime):

- `(import "typst_env" "wasm_minimal_protocol_write_args_to_buffer" (func (param i32)))`

  The argument is a pointer to a buffer (`ptr`).

  Write the arguments for the current function into the buffer pointed at by `ptr`.

  Each function for the protocol receives lengths as its arguments (see [Exported functions](#exported-functions)). The capacity of the buffer pointed at by `ptr` should be at least the sum of all those lengths.

- `(import "typst_env" "wasm_minimal_protocol_send_result_to_host" (func (param i32 i32)))`

>   The first parameter is a pointer to a buffer (`ptr`), the second is the length of the buffer (`len`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The first parameter is a pointer to a buffer (`ptr`), while the second is the length of the buffer (`len`).
```

  If the message should be interpreted as an error message (see [User-defined functions](#user-defined-functions)), it should be encoded as UTF-8.

### Note

If [`wasm_minimal_protocol_send_result_to_host`](#exports) calls `free` (or a similar routine), be careful that the buffer does not point to static memory.

## Exports

Valid plugins need to export a function named `wasm_minimal_protocol_send_result_to_host`, that has signature `func (param i32 i32)`.

This function will be used by the runtime to free the block of memory returned by a [user-defined](#user-defined-functions) function.

## User-defined functions

To conform to the protocol, an exported function should:

- Take `n` arguments `a₁`, `a₂`, ..., `aₙ` of type `u32` (interpreted as lengths, so `usize/size_t` may be preferable), and return one `i32`. We will call the return `return_code`.
- The function should first allocate a buffer `buf` of length `a₁ + a₂ + ⋯ + aₙ`, and call `wasm_minimal_protocol_write_args_to_buffer(buf.ptr)`.

> - The `a₁` first bytes of the buffer constitute the first argument, the `a₂` next bytes the second argument, and so on.

Reviewer 2: imo some kind of serialization is needed here. current code is very unlikely to work on machines of different endianness. maybe we should use some proper ser/de techniques rather than this "home-made" serilization.

Reviewer 3: From what I can gather, `wasmi` is designed to handle both little and big endian execution environment, so this should not be an issue. I'll ask to get a confirmation.

Reviewer 2: i mean, a 4 byte memory chunk can have different meaning in big/little endian. If just write the in-memory representation of a i32 to somewhere, it can be parsed into a different i32 if the endianess doesn't match. For example if the host use big endian and the wasm plugin use little endian, args will be mis-interpreted. 

A better approach is to reach a consensus in the protocol. For example the port number in a tcp packet is always in big endian and this is called the network endianness.

Reviewer 2: I suggest use proper ser/de techniques because serialization frameworks handle all these problems like struct layout and endianess in the background.

Reviewer 3: True, but we never directly write the representation of those `u32`, we use the abstraction provided by `wasmi`. And it converts everything correctly I believe : that is, it converts arguments to little-endian on the `wasm` side, and convert returns back to native endianness for the host. And `wasm` is standardized to always be little endian.

Or do you mean: what if the plugin itself write some data into the buffer, that may be endian-dependant ? I think this is why we restricted to using bytes: if someone want to pass structured data (say, a `i32`), they **have** to choose an endianness.

Reviewer 2: > we never directly write the representation of those u32, we use the abstraction provided by wasmi. And it converts everything correctly I believe

cool! that makes a lot of sense to me. So seems that it's not a problem now at least for this case.

> I think this is why we restricted to using bytes: if someone want to pass structured data (say, a i32), they have to choose an endianness.

I didn't get why restricting the returning value to bytes can solve this problem. The host always need to parse the bytes in someway to make use of it. So there should be some kind of consensus here to parse the data correctly. Or do we just left that to the writer of the plugin? So the plugin writer should decide how to parse the result.

Reviewer 2: It is like "offload" the ser/de efforts to the plugin author. This is kind of strange to me but it seems to be a good start for now.👍

Author: seems resolved then!

Reviewer 3: For the record, [I have confirmation](https://github.com/paritytech/wasmi/issues/749) that endian conversions are automatically done for arguments and results!
